\section{Evaluation} \label{sec:evaluation} 

\subsection{The goal and quality of sequencing process} 

The final goal of sequencing process is to find out the potential matching
coordinates, the number of potential error corresponding to each potential
matching coordinates and the detail information of the difference between input
fragment and subsequences of that coordinates.  The potential matching
coordinates are starting coordinates of subsequences whose edit-distance from
the corresponding fragment is under the saturation value (maximum edit
distance), which is decided by the user. The detail information of the
difference involve the type of differences (one of insertion, deletion and
mismatch), the location of each differences and the sort of base pair
corresponding to the location of difference. Figure~\ref{fig:detail_error} shows the example of
the detail difference information.  The quality of sequencing has two factors,
time and comprehensiveness. The matching time means how long does it takes to
perform and the comprehensiveness means that how many coordinate can be
determined by matching process. So, it can be explained at the concept of
coverage, like how many portion of potential matching points can be found by
the matching process.\\
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{figure}[t] \centering
\vspace{0.1in}
\includegraphics[height=1.8in]{./figure/Detail_Error_B.pdf} \vspace{0in}
\caption{The data structure of detail error}
\label{fig:detail_error} \end{figure}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

\subsection{CPU evaluation and Result} 
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{figure}[b] \centering
\vspace{0.1in}
\includegraphics[height=1.8in]{./figure/CPU_Result_B.pdf} \vspace{0in}
\caption{The total sequencing time of CPU implementations}
\label{fig:cpu_result} \end{figure}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
First of all, we have to retrieve the hash table to memory for sequencing the
input fragment set to Reference sequence. On section \ref{sec:method_hash}, we
extract 22 hash tables corresponding to each chromosome fro Reference sequence.
The matching sequence for the every input fragments is performed for one of the
hash table first. After finishing the matching sequence for the hash table,
then the next hash table is retrieved to the main memory and the matching
sequence is performed again. The reason why we tried to match all the input
fragments to one hash table first is that the required time for loading hash
table takes long time. So, the duplication of hast table loading process needs
to be prevented to improve performance.  There are three comparison methods of
sequencing algorithm. The base line of CPU implementation is no filtering case
and its algorithm is almost equal to the algorithm of mrFAST. After fetching
the fragment, it is divided as several keys whose size is same with hash table
key’s length. If \textit{e} error is allowed, first \textit{e+1} divided
fragment sequences are selected as the keys and it tries to find out the
corresponding coordinate with the each key from the hash table. The subsequence
of Reference sequence, which is located at the coordinate corresponding to the
key, is retrieved from the Reference sequence. These two sequences are compared
with each other by string comparison operation. If the edit-distance between
these two sequences is lower than the maximum allowable edit-distance, then
this location is determined as the potential matching location and the detail
information of difference is informed. In this base line, there is no filtering
method, so the string comparison operation is performed as many as the
summation of all key’s corresponding coordinate size.  Second method uses the
Adjacency Filtering.  Before taking a string comparison, the Adjacency
Filtering is performed to filter out the obviously not matched coordinates.
After Adjacency Filtering, the string comparison is performed only when it is
passed the Adjacency Filtering. The third method is similar with the second
method. The only difference is that the cheapest \textit{e+1} key is selected
as the searching keys.  Figure~\ref{fig:cpu_result} shows the result of the
three versions of CPU implementation. The case using only the Adjacency
Filtering provides 3.7-fold speed up over the base line. The case using both of
the Adjacency Filtering and Cheap Key Selection provides 38.4-fold speedup.\\

\subsection{GPU evaluation and Result} 

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{figure}[t] \centering
\vspace{0.1in}
\includegraphics[height=1.8in]{./figure/GPU_portion_B.pdf} \vspace{-0.2in}
\caption{The total sequencing time of CPU implementations}
\label{fig:gpu_portion} \end{figure}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{figure}[b] \centering
\vspace{0.15in}
\includegraphics[height=1.8in]{./figure/GPU_Result_B.pdf} \vspace{0in}
\caption{The total sequencing time of CPU and GPU implementations}
\label{fig:gpu_result} \end{figure}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Figure~\ref{fig:gpu_portion} shows the time consumptions corresponding to each stage of
sequencing. In the stage of Cheap Key Selection, the input fragment (108
base-pairs length) is divided to 9ea 12 base-pairs length keys and sorted these
keys based on the number of coordinates corresponding to the keys. It takes
about 11\% of total sequencing time. In the stage of input data transfer, the
sorted fragments are shipped to the GPU.  After that, GPU operated Adjacency
filtering and string comparison and it takes about 81.4\% of total sequencing
time. The output data transfer time is about 6.7\% of total sequencing time. The
reason why output data transfer time is quite larger than the input transfer
time, is that output data involves the potential locations, the number of
edit-distance and the detailed information of difference between fragments and
Reference.\\
