\section{Background} \label{sec:background} 

Several mechanisms have been proposed for next generation sequence alignment.
They can be summarized into two categories: Burrows-Wheeler transform based
aligning tool and hash-table based aligning tool. Burrows-Wheeler transform
based aligning tools usually can search for exact match very fast while slow
with inexact matches (matches with the presents of errors). Hash-table based
aligning tools are slow in general but they promise to find all possible
locations in reference DNA sequence where the reference DNA string has fewer
than \textit{e} number of errors. We will briefly describe how they work by
showing one example implementation for each category. \\

\subsection{Burrows-Wheeler transform based aligning tools} \label{bwt}

Burrows-Wheeler transform, together with backward search, is able to mimic the
top-down traversal on the prefix tree of the reference gnome with relatively
small memory footprint. The time complexity of finding the exact match is
O(\textit{m}), with m being the fragment length. For inexact match, such
implementations normally will have to traverse neighbor sibling nodes at every
level of the tree and their corresponding descendants. Such branching
traversing behavior causes the complexity of inexact match to be roughly
O(\textit{m$^{e}$}).  To further explain how it works, let us look at one typical
tool BWA. To understand BWA, we will have to first understand how prefix tree
and backward search works. Then we will explain how Burrows-Wheeler transform
and backward searching can be used to solve DNA sequencing problem. 

\subsubsection{Prefix tree and string matching} \label{prefix_tree}

The prefix tree of string X is a tree where each edge is labeled with a letter
and the string concatenation of the edge letters on one path from a leaf to the
root gives a unique prefix of string X. With the prefix tree, testing whether a
query W is an exact substring of X is equivalent to finding the path starting
from root and reconstructs W along the way. Such testing procedure can be done
in O($\mid$W$\mid$) ($\mid$W$\mid$ is the length of W) time by matching each
letter of W to an edge, starting from root. For inexact match, instead of
matching letters for all edges along the path, now there will be at most
\textit{e} different edges allowed for one traverse from leaf to root. In order
to achieve such error endurance and collect all potential paths, mismatches as
well as deletion and insertion will have to be allowed at each step traversing
the tree, which means not only the exact match edge will be considered
traversing down, but also sibling not matching edges will be traversed for
completeness, we call this full traverse. However, for each different edge
ever passed, the error counter of such path will be incremented, and the
traverse will stop whenever the error counter exceeds the error threshold
\textit{e}. 

\subsubsection{Burrows-Wheeler transform and backward searching} \label{bwt_bs}

Burrows-Wheeler transform is a string transformation function, where for an
input string X it first rotates the text and stores every rotated string in a
matrix. Then, it sorts all rotated string in lexicographic order. The
transformed result string B of string X will be the right most column of the
matrix. There is also a sorted rotation index vector S[], where S[i] denotes
the original order of the now sorted ith rotated string. There is an important
property associated with Burrows-Wheeler transformed string. To explain the
that, we first define:

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{small}
\begin{align*} 
&\mathit{R}_{min} = \mathit{min}\{k:\ W\ is\ the\ prefix\ of\ X_{s[k]}\} \\
&\mathit{R}_{max} = \mathit{max}\{k:\ W\ is\ the\ prefix\ of\ X_{s[k]}\} 
\end{align*}
\end{small}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Above equations translate to \textit{``R$_{min}$(W) is the smallest
order k of the rotated string of X$_{s[k]}$ where W is the prefix of
X$_{s[k]}$.  R$_{max}$(W) vice versa''.} If there is just 1 single
exact match, R$_{min}$(W) = R$_{max}$(W). Let \textit{C(a)} be the number of
symbols in X that are lexicographically smaller than a and \textit{O(a, i)} be
the number of occurrences of a in Burrows-Wheeler transformed string B[0, i],
Ferragina and Manzini proved that:

%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%
\begin{small}
\begin{align*} 
&\mathit{R}_{min}(aW) = C(a) + O(a,R_{min}(W) -1 ) + 1 \\
&\mathit{R}_{max}(aW) = C(a) + O(a,R_{max}(W) -1 ) \\
&\mathit{R}_{min}(aW) <= \mathit{R}_{max}(aW) 
\end{align*}
\end{small}
%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%%

Above equations translated to \textit{``given R$_{max}$(W) and R$_{min}$(W) of
string W, we can get the R$_{max}$ and R$_{min}$ for a new string aW where aW
is the original string W with 1 more letter "a" attached in front of it''.}
Ferragina and Manzini further proved that these 3 condition holds if and only
if aW is also a substring of X. Given these 3 equations, together with
pre-calculated values of C(a) and Burrows-Wheeler transformed string B, one can
quickly get the one of exact match location by picking either R$_{min}$ or
R$_{max}$ and get their corresponding S[R$_{min}$] and S[R$_{max}$]. The way it
calculates R$_{min}$(aW) and R$_{max}$(aW) given R$_{min}$(W) and R$_{max}$(W)
is exactly a mimic of traversing the prefix tree. For exact match, BWA saves
memory since they do not need to store the prefix tree but just a
Burrows-Wheeler transformed string B and some pre-calculated values of C(a)
where a will be any of the for base pairs \{A, C, T, G\}. However, when
matching for inexact case, BWA will also need to mimic full traversing of the
prefix tree by also calculating not only R$_{min}$(aW) and R$_{max}$(aW) for
each additional letter a, but also R$_{max}$(bW) and R$_{max}$(bW) where b can
be all the other mismatched base-pair. The branching behavior will become even
worse when taking insertions and deletions into account. As a result, BWA
performs poorly when trying to get all possible locations.\\

\subsection{Hash-table based aligning tools} \label{hash_tool}

Hash-table based DNA aligning tools on the other hand, store all locations of
reference DNA and the corresponding DNA sequence pattern at the location in a
hash-table, where the pattern is the key and the corresponding locations are
contends associated with that key (the locations is also called coordinates
they are inter-changeable in this paper), as a coordinate list. For each
aligning process, generally a hash-table based aligning tool will first break
the fragment into several small segments and then use the segments as keys to
look into the hash-table.  The hash-table returns all locations that the query
pattern associates so that the tool can retrieve fragment-size long reference
DNA sequence at each location.  Finally there will be a string comparison test,
which determines the similarity between input fragment string and the reference
strings at each location returned by hash-table. Only the locations that pass
the string comparison test with a high confidence score will be considered a
potential match up. Among all hash-table aligning tools, we analyzed mrFAST,
which is a widely used tool guaranteeing full coverage of all possible
locations within some error number \textit{e}. 

\subsubsection{Hash-table query} \label{hash_query}

The first step of aligning process for mrFAST is cutting an input fragment into
several small segments and performing the hash-table look up. For exact
matches, picking any segment as key to access hash-table would guarantee full
coverage of all exact match locations, since the coordinates stored inside the
hash-table matching one segment is the super set of the coordinates matching
the whole fragment (the whole fragment can be matched only if the segment is
matched). For inexact match, if we allow \textit{e} errors, then picking
\textit{e + 1} segments as keys will cover all potential locations, since at
least \textit{1} key will guarantee to be error free, by Pigeon Hole theory (If
there is \textit{m+1} pigeon and \textit{m} holes, at least one hole will have 2
pigeons). Normally, researcher will allow around 5\% of the fragment as
errors. With a pattern length (key length of the hash-table) of 12 base pairs,
the worst case would be using half of the segments as keys. If however, the
error number is larger than the segments number, the pigeonhole theory will no
longer hold, simply because there are not enough segments. To solve such
problem, one can shrink the segment (key) length thus force producing shorter
but more segments. Notice that this will decrease the length of the keys and
causing more coalescing and longer coordinate list in the hash table. As we
will see later, this may degrade the performance as now each key will have a
longer coordinate list to traverse, which results in more string compares.\\

\subsection{String Compares} \label{string_compre}

There are lots of string compare functions. SARUMAN~\cite{saruman} uses Needleman-Wunsch
algorithm~\cite{needleman}, while mrFAST uses Ukkonenâ€™s edit-distance calculation algorithms~\cite{ukkonen}.
The detail of edit-distance calculation algorithm is out of the scope of this
paper. But in short, it returns the exact number of mismatches, insertions and
deletions as well as their locations and different contents. While providing
such detailed information between input fragment string and reference DNA
string, edit-distance calculation is extremely computationally expensive. As a
result, we should avoid calling edit-distance calculation if the coordinate can
be rejected at early stage, before edit-distance calculation. In short, mrFAST
provides full coverage for all possible matching locations given an max error
number \textit{e}. However, due to large amount of edit-distance calculations
and their intrinsic expensive property, mrFAST suffers from long execution
time.\\

\subsection{FastHASH} \label{fast_hash}

As mentioned earlier, Burrows-Wheeler transform based aligning tools, or any
other suffix tree or prefix tree based aligning tools are fast for exact match
but will get exponentially slower as the number of error tolerance increases.
On the other hand, the computation complexity of hash-table based DNA aligning
tools grows linearly as error tolerance increases but they are slow in general.
Our goal is to provide a fast but comprehensive DNA aligning tool. By
comprehensive we mean promise full coverage for finding all potential locations
where the number of differences between input fragment and reference DNA string
is lower than a user set error number \textit{e}. To preserve this
comprehensive property while avoiding exponential slow down as error rate
increases, we decide to optimize hash-table based aligning tool mrFAST.\\

%The rest of the
%paper is organized as the following: Section 3 will describe algorithm
%optimizations. Section 4 will describe GPU implementations. Section 5 will
%describe methodology. Section 6 will provide results and analysis. Section 7
%will be conclusion. Finally section 8 will be future work. \\

